---
layout: post
title: "Copy"
categories: migration
description: "Copy"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->

---

But what if you could look at the income across an entire life? Immediately, from this perspective, a number of fascinating facts emerge. 

*Total lifetime income has not budged for most men, but rose for women* The main sources we typically use to plot income do not track the same people over long periods of time. This makes it difficult to judge whether people who had low incomes early in their career will eventually go on and offset that with much higher earnings later in their careers. The canonical case being doctors, who would be considered at the median of income during their residency but obviously go on to enter the top percentiles of income soon after.

In a new working paper published in the NBER, economists, Fatih Guvenen, Greg Kaplan, Jae Song and Justin Weidner were able to side-step this problem by using social security records to track the same individuals across the course of their prime working years. (One notable exception to the data is that it doesn't include micro level information on employer provided benefits, though there is some good evidence that the richer also take home a disproportionate amount of employer benefits as well. So while it may not change inequality, including employer benefits may actually raise real incomes at the median.)

 And by using the social security data, they were able to this interesting statistic: lifecycle income, the total number of dollars a worker earns during the prime years their working life. What the researchers found was that, across 26 generations of workers between 1957 and 1967, the median lifecycle income for men did not change, while the women saw their lifecycle earnings grew nearly 60 percent. To contrast, men's incomes at 90th percentile of income grew 46 percent and women's grew an astounding 106 percent. 

*Income growth in your 20's and 30's matter*. And in addition to how much you're going to make in your entire life, they also found out when you're going to make it. The researchers estimate that incomes for men at the median grew 55 percent between age 25 and 34, 14 percent between age 35 and 44 and a paltry quarter percent between age 45 and 55.

What is also remarkable is that these patterns were are remarkably consistent across generations. It doesn't matter if they grew up listening to Dylan or the Clash in their teenage years, the pattern of  incomes followed very similar trajectories: big gains before your 40s, tepid gains in your 40s and flatlining income in your 50s. 

*But the biggest driver in lifetime earnings is where you start* If most lifecycles mimic each other where do the differences in lifetime incomes come from? The answer, according to the researchers, is your starting income. If you trace incomes between at age 30, and 35 you see that the lines basically mimick the contours that begin at age 25 until age 45 when they being to flatten out--suggesting that all the variation in total lifetime income is due to what happens at the very beginning of the career. 

*This is bad news for the median millennial man, who made less than at the beginning of their careers than their fathers and grandfathers.* Starting median incomes for men born in 1986 are nearly $4,000 less inflation adjusted terms than man born in 1961. 

*In addition, to being poorer than his ancestors, young millennial men suffer from much higher inequality.* In 1968, a 25 year old man in the 98th percentile of income made 3.3 times as much as a 25 year old man in bottom 10 percentile. By 2012, he made 9 times as much. 

In fact, there is a weird dynamic taking place in the data. While young millennial men at the bottom distribution Only millennial men at the 90th and 98th percentile of income are doing much better at the beginning of their than their fathers and gradfathers. 


To Mr. Guvenen, this is the key question
[QUOTE]

*You can see the development of women's careers in this charts* Differences in shape the lifecycle earnings between men and women are remarkable. Early generations lifecycle curves basically sit on top of each other, suggesting that women regardless of age earned same amount of money in a given year. But beginning in the late 80's, through a combination of more hours and higher wages, women's incomes began to open up. Instead of falling flat, the curves started to swoop up showing that women were consistently moving up the income ladder at each consecutive point of their lives. Or as we like to say in non-econland, they were developing careers.

*Lifecycles add a new dimension to the gender pay gap.* The gender pay gap has fallen nearly between 1960 and 2016. The average women now earn TK cents to the dollar. But what about over the course of a life? Over the course of a life, across every generation reveals a consistent pattern: the pay gap starts small at the start of the career, widens in the mid-30s, and slow diminishes later in the career. The story here is straightforward: the demands of childreer are reducing women's ability to keep up with men. This is actually a result that researchers like Fatih G has found among women at the top of income ladder. And that Goldin finds among women in professional careers. 



Some of the details of the paper to note: the data use earnings from a class of workers that belong to the Commerce and Industry occupational group, which represents 70% of all workers. Notable exceptions from this group are teachers and government employees. All figures are inflation adjusted with the Personal Consumption Expenditure index deflator. Declines in income would be even greater if you used the Consumer Price Index. The income figures do not include benefits paid by the employer, but there is evidence that on the higher end of the income distribution also recieve disproportionately more in employer benefits anyway. 









Meaning that the 
The researchers conclude that it's the starting line.  


[lifecycle for full cohorts only, across age]


The biggest difference separating the incomes for different generations of men seems to be much they end up making at the start of their careers. Leading the researchers to conclude that, for most people, the starting point of a career is more crucial than any gains in earnings you can make during a career. 


 [30's matters alot fact]. 

They note that lifetime earnings men born in the TK and men born in the TK has stagnating at the median and has grown over 25% for the top 10 percent of income. FTG claims that the  






A new paper for Fatih G et al do exactly this with social security records and they come to a startling conclusion: the starting point of careers has become more important than ever. 