---
layout: post
title: "What I Know About DBCFT"
categories: taxes intl 
description: "What I Know About DBCFT"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->

---

## Attempt 1 to explain it

The new GOP plan to re-envision America’s corporate tax system (destination-based cash flow tax with border adjustment) is not pretty--it’s unintuitive, complicated sounding, and leaves the impression that it’s either a: 

1) trade policy  

2) a tax plan that shifts the corporate tax burden from corporations to consumers. In the January alone, at least a dozen articles as well as our very own from Neil has tried to explain the premise of the D.B.C.F.T.

The main ideals of the DBCFT are these: 
* It’s not a tariff or a border tax, or a even trade policy. Instead it’s a comprehensive new system of corporate taxation where you tax the flow of money, not company profits. 
* This makes it harder for companies to execute weird tax shenanigans like (irish TKTK) 
* Net effect of this is that domestic producers and importers alike will bear the brunt of the tax; exporters will not get taxed
* But that’s ok because the tax will make the dollar stronger, offsetting the tax.

The last point here is key. But it is also theoretical. And confidence in whether or not this tax plan is going to work is a function of how confident that economic theory will work (link). 

The exchange rate component of this tax plan works like this. When the federal government puts a tax on imports, America’s demand for imported goods will fall. Since the act of importing means that Americans trade its U.S. dollars for goods from other countries, the supply of U.S. dollars available to other countries go down. Exporters won't have to pay a tax, lowering their cost of doing buisnes, eventually leading them to lower prices of U.S. products abroad (if markets are competitive). The lower prices will lead to higher demand for U.S. products abroad also raising the demand for U.S. dollars to pay for those goods. The net effect is lower supply and higher demand for USD abroad, which leading to higher price USD relative to other currencies. 

In theory, a 20% D.B.C.F.T should lead to a 25% rise in the dollar’s value in order for the D.B.C.F.T to be benign to households. And best case scenario for D.B.C.F.T advocates is for exchange rates adjust to not only adjust but to adjust right away. A lag between when the policy is enacted and the exchange rate adjusting would be very painful for the average consumer. 

## What If Exchange Rates Don't Adjust?
But what happens if the exchange rates don’t adjust? Or what if they don’t adjust right away. In those cases, the consumers are going to foot the bill.

Katheryn Russ, an economist at University of California-Davis who used to work the Council of Economic Advisors under Obama, put together estimates on how much this would hurt consumers if the dollar grew stronger by only half as much as much as it expected to.

On a per dollar basis, the people hurt the most would be the rich. The top 10% of households in income would have to pay over $1,500 more in taxes, while the poorest households would have to pay $300. The stark difference would is largely due to the fact that the rich buy things, in general so their tax burden as a result would be higher. 

But on as a share of income, D.B.C.F.T. would be disproportionately regressive, with the tax eating almost five times as much of their incomes as it does for other income deciles. 


## Why Exchange Rates Won't Adjust

D.B.C.F.T. supporters are confident that the exchange rates will adjust and they have textbook economic theory to support them. But Adam Posen at the Peterson Institute says that the textbook analysis excludes some messy real world details. The key is that while the standard  textbook theory may work to other countries, the U.S. dollar is a special beast. It isn’t simply a medium exchange for global trade, it has a whole host of uses in the global financial system -- it’s a reserve currency for central banks around the world, it is used for TK and TK. He frames it this way: about $4 trillion dollars are traded on foreign exchange markets a day. U.S. trade of good and services total to $408 billion a month -- meaning that trade represent roughly a third of a percent of FX transactions! Simply put, Posen argues that the trade matters so little to the U.S. dollar that it’s unlikely that DBCFT would have any effect on it. 

## Other Arguments Against

Scott Sumner [argues](http://econlog.econlib.org/archives/2017/03/a_dangerous_myt.html) that tourism and purchases of USD properties, which are technically exports won't get the tax subsidy the same way traditional exports would be, since these are things purchases in the United States. I don't know how true this is. But it is a reasonably large component of our exports to ignore. 

Furman and Blanchard [say](https://piie.com/blogs/trade-investment-policy-watch/who-pays-border-adjustment-sooner-or-later-americans-do) that in the long run deficits and surpluses balance each other out. If that's true then the surplus revenue the govt would get from the DBCFT right now (when we have a trade deficit) will cost us later when we run a trade surplus.


