---
layout: post
title: "What I Know About the ACA"
categories: healthcare
description: "What I Know About the ACA"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->

---
## [Ezra Klein and Sarah Kliff's 9k history of ACA](http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2017/3/15/14908524/obamacare-lessons-ahca-gop)

EK and SK published a big 9k word history of ACA. Trying to draw lessons from where it failed and incorporate with what the AHCA should do next. Stylistically, they make a big push to remind readers that this piece is authoratative: we've been reporting on this for 8 years and we've spent 3 months on this very long piece. 

### They lead with an obvious lesson: healthcare has trade offs. Policymakers need to admit as much. 
Nice frame here though: 
	> Obama admin had specific group it wanted to target: old and poor and sick....Therefore they needed to convince the younger healthier and richer that they needed to pay to make this this happen.

This admission was probably the most surprising thing in the piece: 

> Zeke Emanuel, who worked as one of President Obama’s health care advisers, says the administration tilted the playing field too far in favor of the sick and elderly, making it difficult for young people to sign up. He says the administration should have let insurers charge older people more, perhaps four times as much as the youngest consumers.
We made the wrong trade-off,” he says. “The consequence is costs for old people are higher because we don’t have enough young people in the pool.”

In a way, this is exactly what the AHCA is trying to undo. Obamacare is too sweet of a deal for the old, the poor and the sick. The problem is that undoing that feels like a humanitarian and political disaster. 

### Trying to get bipartisanship is bad politics. People look at congressional votes not ideas 

Path dependence matters. The right approach is to Add benefits and don't take them away. 

Clinton's approach tried to change everything at once in secret. Obama's approach was incremental, left the employer insurance market alone, and was open to everyone. 

Even then, the incremental changes were unpopular. It meddled with the individual marketplace and added requirement to what insurnce should have, pushing insurers to drop essentially bad plans, but also angering consumers who were used to those plans. 


### Working with the private sector is hard because you can't control it.

The govt couldn't control the perverse ways the market would work or how businesses would react to new policies. It had no leverage over them. But it had much more power in Medicaid. So Medicaid got better but marketplace was more mixed.

> “The Medicaid expansion works very well, but nobody likes to talk about it,” says Drew Altman, president of the Kaiser Family Foundation. He recently ran focus groups of people on the marketplace. He was surprised to find that “many on the marketplaces would prefer to be on Medicaid. It was a pretty striking contrast.”

> “Medicaid was never legislators’ first choice when they thought about how to expand coverage. But because Medicaid pays doctors less than other programs, it was a cheaper way to cover millions of Americans. Democrats couldn’t afford a bill that expanded more expensive private insurance to everyone, so they included Medicaid as a significant source of coverage.”


### Household cashflow over everything

Obama admin thought that they should limit the long term costs of plan thinking that this satisfy experts and voters worried about the budget. But voters government budget worries are supremely trumped by their wallets. If you squeeze ppls pocketbooks, nothing else matters. So voters probably could tolerate billions more in extra spending long term, if they got more relief through the credits. Credits may be too low. 

### Medical costs are too high
Obamacare tried to fix volume. But did not fix prices.

> `The Affordable Care Act did not aim to regulate health care prices in the United States. Instead, it emphasized reducing the volume of health care in the United States. It tried to get rid of the financial incentives of a “fee for service” system that pays doctors for every test or procedure, regardless of whether it's actually necessary.

Prices still a big problem. Still need more reporting and research to figure out why its so high.